Document dotnet-gcdump tool (#19697)
dotnet/docs: docs/core/diagnostics/dotnet-gcdump.md

---
title: dotnet-gcdump - .NET Core
description: Installing and using the dotnet-gcdump command-line tool.
ms.date: 07/26/2020
---

> # Heap analysis tool (`dotnet-gcdump`)

Reviewer: Following the pattern of the other docs:
```suggestion
# dotnet-gcdump
```

Also it's best to avoid applying text styles to headings.

Author: The current heading is consistent with https://github.com/dotnet/docs/blob/master/docs/core/diagnostics/dotnet-dump.md
I wouldn't mind remove the text style from both the headings, but I personally like keeping the small description of the tool in the H1s. It also recommended that H1s be different from titles AFAIK.

Reviewer: >keeping the small description of the tool in the H1s

OK

Author: ```suggestion
# Heap analysis tool (dotnet-gcdump)
```

**This article applies to:** ✔️ .NET Core 3.1 SDK and later versions

> ## Installing `dotnet-gcdump`

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Install dotnet-gcdump
```

To install the latest release version of the `dotnet-gcdump` [NuGet package](https://www.nuget.org/packages/dotnet-gcdump), use the [dotnet tool install](../tools/dotnet-tool-install.md) command:

```dotnetcli
dotnet tool install -g dotnet-gcdump
```

## Synopsis

```console
dotnet-gcdump [-h|--help] [--version] <command>
```

## Description

> The `dotnet-gcdump` global tool is a way to collect gcdumps of live .NET processes. It is built using the EventPipe technology which is a cross-platform alternative to ETW on Windows. Gcdumps are created by triggering a GC in the target process, turning on special events, and regenerating the graph of object roots from the event stream. This allows for gcdumps to be collected while the process is running with minimal overhead. These dumps are useful for several scenarios:

Reviewer: gcdumps/gcdumps isn't a word
```suggestion
The `dotnet-gcdump` global tool is a way to collect dumps of live .NET processes. It uses the EventPipe technology, which is a cross-platform alternative to ETW on Windows. Dumps are created by triggering a garbage collection (GC) in the target process, turning on special events, and regenerating the graph of object roots from the event stream. This allows for dumps to be collected while the process is running, with minimal overhead. These dumps are useful for several scenarios:
```
Can EventPipe technology be a link to an overview of that?

Author: Would that make any confusion with the `dotnet-dump` tool?

I'm not familiar with any of both the tools, but I think instead of replacing gcdumps with dumps, we may change it to gc dumps or GC dumps?

Reviewer: The gcdump tool produces dumps -- in context there should be no cause for confusion because we're not talking about the dump tool. That said, if you prefer to use GC dumps I'm OK with that as long as at the first occurrence of GC the acronym is spelled out.

> - comparing the number of objects on the heap at several points in time.
> - analyzing roots of objects (answering questions like, "what still has a reference to this type?").
> - collecting general statistics about the counts of objects on the heap.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Comparing the number of objects on the heap at several points in time.
- Analyzing roots of objects (answering questions like, "what still has a reference to this type?").
- Collecting general statistics about the counts of objects on the heap.
```

## Options

- **`--version`**

  Displays the version of the `dotnet-gcdump` utility.

- **`-h|--help`**

  Shows command-line help.

> ## `dotnet-gcdump collect`

Reviewer: A Commands section here like the one in https://raw.githubusercontent.com/dotnet/docs/master/docs/core/diagnostics/dotnet-counters.md might be helpful. Then the following h2s would correspond to the commands in the table.

Author: @tdykstra, The live docs has a side-bar containing links to all H2s, I personally think a commands section with only links to the heading is noisy and repetitive with the sidebar.

Reviewer: OK to omit the Commands section.

> Collects a gcdump from a currently running process.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Collects a dump from a currently running process.
```

### Synopsis

```console
dotnet-gcdump collect [-h|--help] [-p|--process-id <pid>] [-o|--output <gcdump-file-path>] [-v|--verbose] [-t|--timeout <timeout>] [-n|--name <name>]
```

> ### Options

Reviewer: Following the pattern of https://raw.githubusercontent.com/dotnet/docs/master/docs/core/diagnostics/dotnet-counters.md we should have an  Examples h3 section following each Options h3 section.

- **`-h|--help`**

  Shows command-line help.

- **`-p|--process-id <pid>`**

>   The process id to collect the gcdump.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  The process id to collect the dump.
```

- **`-o|--output <gcdump-file-path>`**

>   The path where collected gcdumps should be written. Defaults to *.\\YYYYMMDD\_HHMMSS\_\<pid>.gcdump*.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  The path where collected dumps should be written. Defaults to *.\\YYYYMMDD\_HHMMSS\_\<pid>.gcdump*.
```
An example would be helpful.

- **`-v|--verbose`**

>   Output the log while collecting the gcdump.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  Output the log while collecting the dump.
```

- **`-t|--timeout <timeout>`**

>   Give up on collecting the gcdump if it takes longer than this many seconds. The default value is 30s.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  Give up on collecting the dump if it takes longer than this many seconds. The default value is 30.
```

- **`-n|--name <name>`**

>   The name of the process to collect the gcdump.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  The name of the process to collect the dump for.
```

## `dotnet-gcdump ps`

> Lists the dotnet processes that gcdumps can be collected.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Lists the dotnet processes that dumps can be collected for.
```

Author: @tdykstra why change gcdumps to dumps?
The "for" word seems to be missing in the tool itself too.

I opened https://github.com/dotnet/diagnostics/pull/1387 to fix that in the tool.

I'll apply adding "for" now, and wait for your feedback about changing gcdumps to dumps

```suggestion
Lists the dotnet processes that gcdumps can be collected for.
```

### Synopsis

```console
dotnet-gcdump ps
```

## `dotnet-gcdump report <gcdump_filename>`

> Generate report into stdout from a previously generated gcdump or from a running process.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Generate a report from a previously generated dump or from a running process, and write to `stdout`.
```

### Synopsis

```console
dotnet-gcdump report [-h|--help] [-p|--process-id <pid>] [-t|--report-type <HeapStat>]
```

### Options

- **`-h|--help`**

  Shows command-line help.

- **`-p|--process-id <pid>`**

>   The process id to collect the trace.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  The process id to collect the dump for.
```

Author: Is "trace" not correct here?
This is exactly what `dotnet-gcdump report -h` prints.

![image](https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/31348972/88631821-1186ed00-d0b3-11ea-9f19-ac106d7e0299.png)

If trace is incorrect or inaccurate, the tool should be updated.

Reviewer: my guess is that's a copy/paste error  from dotnet-trace.

But looking at the dotnet-trace doc I see it uses "from" where I put "for" at the end of sentences like "... to collect the dump from" -- for consistency I'd go with "from" instead of "for" in this doc.

Author: I've opened https://github.com/dotnet/diagnostics/pull/1388 to fix that in the tool side.

```suggestion
  The process id to collect the GC dump from.
```

- **`-t|--report-type <HeapStat>`**

>   The type of report to generate. Available options: heapstat (default).

Reviewer: If this is the only option, what's the difference between specifying it an omitting it?

Author: @tdykstra, I had this question myself. It looks like there shouldn't be a difference. Perhaps the tool team might be planning to add other options later?

Reviewer 2: /cc @josalem

Reviewer 3: This is only report type available right now and therefore the default, but we created this flag for future use if/when we add more report types.

  Shows command-line help.

- **`-p|--process-id <pid>`**

  The process id to collect the GC dump from.

- **`-o|--output <gcdump-file-path>`**

  The path where collected GC dumps should be written. Defaults to *.\\YYYYMMDD\_HHMMSS\_\<pid>.gcdump*.

- **`-v|--verbose`**

  Output the log while collecting the GC dump.

- **`-t|--timeout <timeout>`**

  Give up on collecting the GC dump if it takes longer than this many seconds. The default value is 30.

- **`-n|--name <name>`**

  The name of the process to collect the GC dump from.

## `dotnet-gcdump ps`

Lists the dotnet processes that GC dumps can be collected for.

### Synopsis

```console
dotnet-gcdump ps
```

## `dotnet-gcdump report <gcdump_filename>`

Generate a report from a previously generated GC dump or from a running process, and write to `stdout`.

### Synopsis

```console
dotnet-gcdump report [-h|--help] [-p|--process-id <pid>] [-t|--report-type <HeapStat>]
```

### Options

- **`-h|--help`**

  Shows command-line help.

- **`-p|--process-id <pid>`**

  The process id to collect the GC dump from.

- **`-t|--report-type <HeapStat>`**

  The type of report to generate. Available options: heapstat (default).

> ## Viewing the GC dump captured from dotnet-gcdump

Reviewer: This might fit as an H3 in the Description section

> On Windows, `.gcdump` files can be viewed in PerfView (https://github.com/microsoft/perfview) for analysis or in Visual Studio. Currently, There is no way of opening a `.gcdump` on non-Windows platforms.

Reviewer: mdlint error -- could make PerfView a link

Author: ```suggestion
On Windows, `.gcdump` files can be viewed in [PerfView](https://github.com/microsoft/perfview) for analysis or in Visual Studio. Currently, There is no way of opening a `.gcdump` on non-Windows platforms.
```

You can collect multiple `.gcdump`s and open them simultaneously in Visual Studio to get a comparison experience.

> ## Known caveats

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Troubleshoot
```
